Global warming is the most horrific challenge facing these regions, we are told.
The Copenhagen Consensus Center set out to ask people in global-warming hot spots about their fears and hopes.
In Mojo, central Ethiopia, our researchers met Tadese Denkue, a 68-year-old former soldier with no regular income.
He has more immediate concerns: “The first thing I need is food, and then a job.”
The threat of more malaria has been used to argue for drastic carbon cuts.
The most efficient, global carbon cuts – designed to keep temperature increases under two degrees Celsius – would cost $40 trillion a year by 2100, according to research by Richard Tol for the Copenhagen Consensus Center.
In comparison, spending $3 billion annually on mosquito nets, environmentally safe indoor DDT sprays, and subsidies for effective new combination therapies could halve the total number of those infected within one decade.
For the money it takes to save one life with carbon cuts, smarter policies could save 78,000 lives.
Twenty kilometers from Mojo, our researcher met Desi Koricho and her eight-month-old son, Michel.
After two months of malnutrition treatment, Michel has grown a lot but remains half the normal size of a baby his age.
Solving the malnutrition challenge would be a good start.
Campaigners across Europe and the US use the threat of starvation to argue for drastic carbon cuts.
But, as with malaria, all of the evidence shows that direct policies are much more effective than carbon cuts.
Providing Vitamin A and zinc to 80% of the 140 million or so undernourished children in the world would require a commitment of just $60 million annually.
For $286 million, we could get iron and iodine to more than 2.5 billion people.
Compare this to the investments to tackle climate change – $40 trillion annually by the end of the century – which would save a hundred times fewer starving people (and in 90 years!).
On Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania – where the effects of global warming can already be felt – our researcher encountered 28-year-old Rehema Ibrahim.
She knows what our researcher means by “global warming.” But, she says: “The issues I am experiencing have greater priority.
The HIV and the problems it is causing are greater than the [receding] ice.”
