The result is that the poor don’t get the help they need, and taxpayers in rich countries lose confidence in the use of their aid funds.
Africa turns out to be especially unlucky, because it has a combination of high temperatures and the mosquitos that are likely to transmit the disease.
Many end up taking cheap medicines that are not effective because the malaria parasite has developed resistance to them.
If rich-country governments thought practically about malaria and recognized that it is a full-scale emergency, they could support simple and practical solutions: bed nets and timely access to medicine.
Rich countries would buy bed nets from companies that produce them and work with African governments to distribute them free of charge to every African household.
And they would work with African governments to ensure that the correct medicines are available for quick use within each village.
There are one billion people living in rich donor countries, and the total cost of comprehensive malaria control in Africa – giving bed nets at no cost to all Africans, and providing the right medicines within every village – is around $2.5 billion per year, or just $2.50 per citizen of the rich countries.
The tragic result has been extremely low use of nets throughout most of Africa, since impoverished people lack the purchasing power to buy nets.
Second, donor governments have failed to promote simple ways to ensure the availability of medicines in villages across the continent.
Rather than shipping medicines to each country on the basis of estimated needs, donor agencies have set up a complicated purchasing system that has led to years of delay in getting medicines to the villages.
Malaria is spreading, and new scientific evidence indicates that people infected with HIV are more likely to transmit it to others when they are also infected with malaria.
The world’s safety, including the safety of people living in rich countries, depends on the global community’s ability to prove that it will come to the aid of all who are in desperate need.
