Across the Middle East, as elsewhere, expectations are building that his presidency will herald a new era for America’s role in the world.
That the same society elected an African-American president only a few decades later renews Palestinian hopes that, in our ongoing struggle for justice and freedom, we, too, shall overcome.
This month marks the twentieth anniversary of the Palestinian Declaration of Independence.
Over 726,000 Palestinian Christians and Muslims – the majority of the Arab population of mandatory Palestine – fled or were forced to leave their homes by Zionist militias.
In the year since Palestinians and Israelis renewed their commitment to their obligations under the “road map,” we may have failed to reach a conclusive settlement to our conflict, but that does not mean that the efforts made were in vain.
With the determination of both sides, I am confident that we can reach a final agreement in relatively short order.
Not only has Israel failed to halt its settlement activity since Annapolis – in violation of international law and its renewed road map commitments – but it has actually accelerated such activity.
Israeli demolitions of Palestinian homes have also increased, particularly in occupied East Jerusalem.
Nothing undermines Palestinian faith in the peace process like watching the homes of our families flattened, while the architecture of our oppression is strengthened.
Fourth, the US should renew its respect for international law by recognizing three principles: that the 1967 pre-occupation boundaries must be respected in any negotiations; that Palestinian sovereignty over East Jerusalem must be safeguarded, with guaranteed access for Muslims, Christians, and Jews to their holy sites; and that the plight of Palestinian refugees, whose 60-year ordeal remains emblematic of the Palestinian predicament, must be acknowledged and fairly addressed.
Fortunately, a framework already exists that supports these concerns.
Our Declaration of Independence is now twenty years old.
