Today, enterprising firms offer, for a fee, to tell you about your genes.
They claim that this knowledge will help you live longer and better.
You might, for example, have extra checkups to detect early signs of the diseases that you are most at risk of contracting, or you could alter your diet to reduce that risk.
If your chances of a long lifespan are not good, you might buy more life insurance, or even retire early to have enough time to do what you always wanted to do.
Selecting our children raises more profound ethical problems.
In developed countries, the routine testing of older pregnant women, combined with the availability of abortion, has significantly reduced the incidence of conditions like Down syndrome.
In some regions of India and China where couples are anxious to have a son, selective abortion has been the ultimate form of sexism, and has been practiced to such an extent that a generation is coming of age in which males face a shortage of female partners.
For many parents, nothing is more important than giving their child the best possible start in life.
They buy expensive toys to maximize their child’s learning potential and spend much more on private schools or after school tutoring in the hope that he or she will excel on the tests that determine entry to elite universities.
It may not be long before we can identify genes that improve the odds of success in this quest.
Many will condemn this as a resurgence of “eugenics,” the view, especially popular in the early twentieth century, that hereditary traits should be improved through active intervention.
If it leads to healthier, smarter people with better problem-solving abilities, that will be a good thing.
But even if parents make choices that are good for their children, there could be perils as well as blessings.
The most alarming implication of this mode of genetic selection, however, is that only the rich will be able to afford it.
But avoiding this outcome will not be easy, for it will require that selection for genetic enhancement is either available to no one or accessible to everyone.
